Hi, I'm Patrick, and I work on a
performance team at Apple.
Today, we'll be discussing scrolling and
animation hitches in your apps,
and look at the render loop in detail.
First, we'll get a general
sense of what is a hitch.
Then, we'll discuss the render
loop and the different types
of hitches that can happen.
Finally,
we'll discuss how to measure hitches.
So first, what is a hitch?
In your app,
a person might drag their finger
across the screen to scroll,
they might tap a button
and expect feedback,
or transition between
views in a hierarchy.
These animations build a visual
sense of connection between
people and content on screen.
Animation hitches can cause jumps in
animations and break that connection,
causing confusion instead of delight.
A hitch is any time a frame appears
on screen later than expected.
Let's look at a common example
of scrolling a collection view.
Here, we have a Meal Planner app that
helps us curate our favorite recipes.
As user drags their finger up the screen,
the scroll view responds
by moving the content up.
But while scrolling,
we notice a jump in the content.
If we look at this frame by frame,
we can see our finger moving with the
content in the first three frames.
But in the next frame,
the content appears to stall.
That's because the third
frame actually repeated,
staying on the display for another frame.
Finally, comes the fourth frame,
and it appears to jump forward
to where our finger is.
The third frame repeated because
the fourth frame arrived late,
and the user saw a hitch.
Hitches are caused when the render
loop fails to finish a frame on time.
So let's look into the render loop.
The render loop is a continuous
process by which touch
events are handed to an app,
and then changes to the UI are
sent to the operating system
where the frame is finalized.
It's a loop, and it happens at the
device's refresh rate.
On iPhone and iPad,
this is 60 frames per second,
which means a new frame can be
displayed every 16.67 milliseconds.
On iPad Pro,
this is 120 frames per second,
which means a new frame can be
displayed every 8.33 milliseconds.
At the beginning of a frame,
the hardware emits an
event called a VSYNC.
The VSYNC denotes when a
new frame must be ready.
We highlight them in the display track,
so it's easy to see the deadline.
The render loop is timed to VSYNCs and
must hit checkpoints along the way
in order to have a frame ready.
It's broken up into three stages.
The first stage is in your app,
where events are handled and
changes are made to the UI.
That work must complete
before the next VSync,
so the next stage can begin.
The next stage happens in a separate
process called the render server.
This is where your
UI is actually rendered.
This stage must also complete
before the next VSync,
so that the frame can be displayed,
which is the third and final stage.
An important caveat to the three-stage
process is that the frame is processed
for two frames before display.
We call this double buffering,
but there is another mode.
To avoid hitches, the system may switch
to triple buffering,
where the render server
is given one extra frame
duration to complete its work.
Since this is a fallback mode,
we're going to focus on double
buffering while talking about
hitches and the render loop.
Overall, the entire render loop is
made up of five phases.
The loop begins with the first phase,
the event phase.
Here, your app handles touch events and
decides if a change is needed in the UI.
Next is the commit phase.
In the commit phase,
your app updates its UI and submits
that to the render server for rendering.
On the next vSync,
the render server takes that submission
and in the render prepare phase,
prepares it for drawing on the GPU.
In the render execute phase,
the GPU draws your UI into a final image,
so that on the next vSync,
the frame can be displayed to your user.
Each stage is critical to having a
smooth user experience every frame,
even the render work.
Although it happens
in a separate process,
it does work on your app's behalf,
so it's on you to ensure your layer
tree can be processed and drawn in time.
To understand this a little further,
let's look at an example.
In this example,
we're going to follow this
frame through the render loop
to see each phase along the way.
First is the event phase,
where the app will receive events.
These events are things like touches,
networking callbacks, keyboard presses,
and timers.
The app can respond to these events in
any way by altering its layer hierarchy.
For example, the app can change the
background color of a layer,
or even change a layer's
size and position.
But when the app updates
the bounds of a layer,
core animation also
calls set needs layout.
This identifies all the layers which must
recalculate their layout in response.
The system will coalesce these
need layout requests and perform
them in order during the commit
phase to reduce duplicate work.
If any layout is needed,
the commit phase will automatically
start once the event phase finishes.
First, the system takes all the layers
requiring layout and lays them out
one at a time from parent to child.
Layout is a common
performance bottleneck,
so keep in mind that your
app only has a couple of
milliseconds to complete this work.
Some views also require custom drawing,
like labels, image views,
or just any view overwriting draw rect.
If these views require a visual update,
they must call set needs display.
Like layout,
the system will coalesce these
requests to perform them once
all layout has completed.
During the drawing process,
every custom drawing layer will receive
a texture-backed core graphics context,
which they'll draw into.
As far as core animation is concerned,
these layers are now just images.
And now that all layers
have laid out and drawn,
the entire altered layer tree
is collected and sent to the
render server for rendering.
Now we are in the render server,
which is responsible for
turning our layer tree into
an actual displayable image.
In the prepare phase,
the render server iterates through the
app's layer tree and prepares a linear
pipeline that the GPU can then execute.
Starting from the top layer,
it works its way from parent to child
and sibling to sibling so that the
layers are arranged from back to front.
Next, this linear pipeline is
passed through the GPU,
where each layer is composited
into a final texture.
Some layers can take longer to render,
and this is another common performance
bottleneck we will discuss shortly.
Great.
So once the GPU executes and
renders the image on the right,
it's ready to be displayed
on the next vSync.
Each phase of the render loop is
performance sensitive and has a deadline.
The deadline is the next VSync.
To hit the target frame rate
and maintain low input latency,
this entire process is actually
happening in parallel every frame.
This way,
the pipeline becomes concurrent,
and our app can prepare a new frame while
the system is rendering the previous one.
This is why any missed
deadlines are so important.
Now that you see how
the render loop works,
let's dive into what types of
hitches you might see in your apps.
There are two primary types:
commit hitches,
which happen within the app's process,
and render hitches,
which happen in the render server.
A commit hitch is when the app takes
too long to process events or commit.
Here, the commit takes too long
and misses the deadline.
So in the next VSync,
the render server has nothing to process.
It now must wait for the next
VSync to begin rendering.
And now we have delayed the
frame delivery time by one frame.
In milliseconds,
that's 16.67 milliseconds
on an iPhone or iPad.
We call this delayed duration hitch time,
and we measure it in milliseconds.
If the commit work took even longer
and went past the next v-sync,
then the frame would
be late by two frames,
or 33.34 milliseconds.
That's 33.34 milliseconds that the
user is not seeing a smooth scroll.
To understand more about commit hitches
and how you can fix them in your apps,
check out Find and Fix Hitches
in the Commit phase.
The second type of
hitch is a render hitch.
These happen when the render
server is unable to prepare or
execute our layer tree on time.
Here, the render execute phase takes too
long and goes over the VSync boundary.
The frame was therefore
not ready on time,
and the green frame was displayed
one frame later than expected.
Once again,
we have a 16 millisecond hitch time.
To understand more about render hitches
and how to optimize your layer tree,
check out "Demystify and Eliminate
Hitches in the Render Phase."
Great.
So those are the two
main types of hitches.
Now let's turn our focus to how
we measure and quantify hitches.
We looked at hitch time
in the previous slides.
It's very useful when
talking about a single hitch,
but can become intractable
when discussing longer
term events like scrolls,
animations, or transitions.
Firstly, it's difficult to compare unless
each scroll or animation takes
the exact same amount of time,
and therefore,
the exact same number of frames.
What's worse is that iOS devices
do not always update the screen.
If there are no commits
sent to the render server,
no new frame is submitted.
That makes it even harder to compare
hitch time across tests and devices.
So instead,
we use a metric called hitch time ratio.
Hitch time ratio is the total hitch time
in an interval divided by its duration.
Because it's normalized to total time,
we can compare it across experiences.
It's measured in hitch
milliseconds per second,
so it represents the amount
of milliseconds the device
was hitching every second.
To learn about how you can
use this metric to measure
your own app performance,
check out What's New in Metric Kit.
To see how to track hitch
time ratio in your test suite,
check out Eliminate
Animation Hitches with XCTest.
Finally, let's look at an example where
hitch time ratio can be used.
Here, we have 30 frames,
which on an iPhone is half
a second's worth of work.
Each frame hits its deadline,
and the user sees no hitches.
The hitch time is zero,
and the hitch time ratio is also zero.
But now, we see a display track on the
bottom with disjoint intervals.
Some frames are on screen
longer than others,
and some commits and
renders are causing hitches.
If we add up this hitch time,
we get 100.02 milliseconds.
Over half a second,
we have a hitch time ratio of
200.04 milliseconds per second.
This is just an example.
In general, these are the target hitch
ratios we recommend and use
in our tools here at Apple.
Although this goal is zero
hitch milliseconds per second,
anything under five hitch milliseconds
per second is considered good and
mostly unnoticeable by a user.
Between five and ten hitch
milliseconds per second,
the user is going to
notice some interruptions,
and these should be investigated.
Over ten hitch milliseconds per second,
hitches are greatly impacting
the user experience,
and you should immediately investigate
how to optimize your render loop.
To recap,
today we discussed the render loop and
how a new frame is displayed to the user.
We looked at what a hitch
is and the two types,
a commit hitch and a render hitch.
Finally, we defined the hitch time
ratio to measure the amount
of hitching experienced by
users within a given duration.
To learn more about the types
of hitches and how to catch
and fix them in your apps,
please check out our two talks on
commit hitches and render hitches.
We can't wait to see
your buttery smooth apps,
and thanks for watching.